case number 14 - 5230 Jefferson Morley
appellant versus Central Intelligence
Agency mr. gosar for the appellant
mr. Peterson for the ethylene thank you
and just to let everybody know judge
Williams is participating by telephone
today and judge Ginsburg will consider
the cases based on the other audio
recordings of the arguments thank good
morning your honor
thank you very much for you and the
judge Williams
I'm James H alas are representing the
plaintiff appellant of Jefferson Morley
mr. man I have a question for you I'll
start right in right now I think it's
clear under our cases that the question
of the utility of the information
gathered is evaluated X planning and
excuse me I missed the two words there
the value of the information gathered is
considered in other words the prospect
of some useful information not not
whether useful information interesting
information publicly using information
is obtained that needs to be cleared
there David but in figuring out what
information judge tax planning is of
interest I notice David says the
information they are requested about
individuals allegedly involved in
President Kennedy's assassination
services public benefit I'm trying to
figure out what is really intended with
allegedly involved we spoke someone
alleges that the whole assassination was
engineered by Steven Williams is that
that means an inquiry a FOIA inquiry
into every activity of Steven Williams
before the assassination date is
would be covered I think that would be
an insufficient Nexus the that I
reviewed yesterday the oral argument in
2013 at which you were present and
similar maybe the what struck me about
essentially the issue then was whether
or not the district court had complied
with the law of the circuit as expressed
in Davie yeah and the court remanded to
to require him to comply with the law of
the circuit now the law of the circuit
judge edwards who was a member of the
panel at that hearing repeatedly
expressed the issue in a little bit
different terminology than is used in
the Devi opinion itself he referred to
the test as being the let me say I've
been here that the topic of the request
and the purpose of the request as
opposed to the contents of the request
and he pointed out that in Devi the
dissenting judge had based his opinion
judge randolph
had based his opinion on the contents of
the document
yeah I think there's no doubt at this
point that you look at the request for
particular documents are delivered but
what I'm trying to figure out is how
much of a burden the requester has to
show that there was the prospect of
something valuable
well everyone agrees the Kennedy
assassination was a terrible event and
be something of enormous consequence and
thoughts about an understanding of it
it's very important in even in modern
America so that that's a given but how
what I'm what I'm trying to acquire is
how of serious a connection to that
event has to be shown to fit within the
idea that it has the requisite
probability of turning up something of
public interest well I thought the
hypothetical I gave was clearly beyond
the range I hope I would agreed to that
I think you know if it's wholly
irrelevant to the controversy that
certainly would disqualify it but of
course you may not know that ex ante I
mean that's the problem is that it was
there generally a question raises that
you have no ex ante whether it's wholly
irrelevant now we might all think that
it's very unlikely that there was an
element and that's why I think that that
the liberal standard adopted by Davie is
the appropriate standard and it's it in
any case what however you try to draw
the boundaries on that nexus it's met
here and met here that may that may be
true at least well we'll assume that for
purposes of the question but I guess the
question judge willing to raise is an
important one because we have to ask we
have to ask ourselves about the
implications of a regime
that we adopt and we probably want to
avoid adopting a regime that's going to
open the floodgates in this kind of
context but I wonder if part of and you
tell me since here and the business of
at least in this particular instance of
formulating FOIA requests I take it we
only get to the question of public
interest
if somebody's substantially prevailed in
the first place so because we're only
talking about the fees aspect of the
case yes so in order to even get down
the road tour we'd ask whether it's a
Varrick interest in asking whether Steve
Williams association with the Kennedy
assassination is something that passes
the bar we have to assume a circumstance
in which there was a FOIA request made
that went to litigation and the requests
are substantially prevailed yes that's
that's certainly and that is the the
first of two things that are mentioned
in Davie
the first one is be the effect on the
litigation and here the effect on the
litigation the fruit of the Levitt
allegis case later the attentions Laish
of the litigation was that new
information was released that's one of
the changes since this case was last
argued in this court is that the CIA and
the district court judge now concede
that new information was released right
I guess what I'm trying to ask is is it
true and I just don't know the answer it
so that's why I put it to you is it true
that one check against the possibility
that we would have requests that bear an
insufficient Nexus one check against
that possibility is that it's unlikely
that you'd have a situation in which the
requests are substantially prevailed in
the first place so you never get to that
question yes that's that's the the first
thing then another thing that I would
point out is that the the CIA in
responding to the
in effect held that there was a
connection to the JFK assassination
because it referred the request trying
to try to force the requester to refer
the request to the National Archives
because of its jf JFK act the collection
was there so the the the CIA in its
response assumed that I would also point
out that it's not just the JFK
assassination that is at issue here the
the the beginning of this Court's last
opinion lays out three or four factual
findings that the requester had made a
request for JFK assassination records
that he hadn't obtained the records that
records relating to the Kennedy
assassination were released as as a
result so in a sense I think this Court
has already foreclosed that Avenue it
has found that these records were
related to the Kennedy assassination the
question is whether the Kennedy
assassination is a significant
historical event I think everyone agrees
that it was an incredibly important
historical event but the question is how
close just the relationship between the
request and the event has to be well my
guess is there's nothing of sliding
scale that is to say a something digging
deeper into the Kennedy administration
probably gets more slack than digging
deeper into the BP oil spill yes I think
this did you say more flack or more
lower the lower probability hitting any
pay dirt is acceptable I think that is I
think that's true because the the stakes
are very great the basically what you
have a situation in which there has been
investigation after investigation that
has discounted the original findings of
the Warren Commission and you have
numerous questions arising as a result
of that the activities of mr. Joe and
edie's are related to that because one
of the things that was learned after the
Warren Commission report was that it had
never inquired about the assassination
plots against Castro here there is a
nexus because the request is directed at
Joe Inez and he was in charge of a human
exile group that was responsible for
plotting those assassination efforts
against Castro and he was also involved
directly with the House Select Committee
on assassinations he kept information
from the House Select Committee on
assassinations including the fact that
he was the case officer they were
looking for us so they could investigate
the connections between Lee Harvey
Oswald and this Cuban exile group can I
ask that it can ask the following
question about the point that judge
Williams started with which is that in
applying the public benefit part of the
standard the first prong we look to the
request as it's framed ex ante rather
than expose that what's in fact released
because and there's certainly some sense
to that because from the perspective of
the requester they don't know what
they're going to get until they
and requests in the government response
but in Davy
there's certainly language to that
effect but there was also mention at
least of what when fact was released
that's post and I'm just wondering what
you think the relevance of the mention
and Davy of what in fact was released ex
post is if we're only looking at ex ante
I think that the the real focus is on
the relationship between the documents
released and and the event and the
documents release there showed that that
the they related to a person who had
been charged with conspiring to commit
the assassination of President Kennedy
Clay Shaw so there was a clear nexus
between an obvious matter of public
interest the prosecution of a citizen of
the United States for having conspired
to assassinate the present president and
the documents there is the same kind of
relationship here where you have
documents that indicate extol Johnny D's
for his accomplishments at times when he
was won in nineteen sixty one sixty two
sixty two through 64 area when he was
involved in running the d-r-e
the CIA funded exile organization that
was right all of which all of which goes
to and you you have arguments to this
effect all of which goes to what in fact
was released yes what in fact you
obtained I guess my question is there
the the framing of this public interest
the public benefit criterion could focus
on not necessarily what in fact was
released but what was requested at the
outset because
the idea being that the requester
doesn't know at the outset what's going
to come out in the endeavor because
that's why they're asking because they
don't know what's behind the wall and so
they put in a request and if so I take
it part of your argument is we should be
looking at Santee it was what was
requested and there's certainly a lot of
language in davie that would support
that frame of reference rather than
looking at next posted what was released
I guess my question is but Davies not
entirely lacking in language that points
to what was in fact released after the
fact and also it's it seems that both I
would agree with that assessment
it does have to seem both but the the
holding of the case I think it's pretty
clear that the judge Edwards
summarization of it is I think right on
the mark that it is not the contents of
the documents it is the nexus between
the request and the event okay yes yes
some of these documents were available
in the archive for a copy of what 25
cents a page it made me way back to my
recollection is it's evenly more
expensive than that now but but low
compared to lawyers beep yeah that's
sometimes that's the point you made at
the last hearing yet yeah at least
insofar as litigation revolved around
that issue doesn't US tax analysts
prevent the award of fees for any
tangible part of litigation directed to
documents that are available in the
archives no I don't think so
the tax analysts decision
down the way it did because the
requester had a very strong direct
personal financial interest in obtaining
the documents the the he was essentially
running a subscription service and he
wanted a quick and easy way to get the
documents for a private entity that was
making money off giving the documents
that's a far cry from the circumstances
here where you can argue that Jefferson
morally had something of a commercial
interest what judge Edwards referred to
as a quasi commercial interests but the
quasi commercial interest is still in
the favor of in the favorite category of
Public Interest requesters that quasi
commercial category is not discounted
for qualification of the public benefit
analysis or under any of the four
factors but this is also where the the
potential distinction between ex ante
and ex post starts to confuse the mind a
bit because I can understand the impetus
behind segregating than the documents
that are available otherwise from
another agency from those that are new
but ex ante nobody knows at least the
requester doesn't know well the
situation with the National Archives is
there first of all there been new
developments since the last hearing on
with regard to the National Archives I
went into with judge Williams I think in
some detail at the last hearing about
the procedures for trying to obtain JFK
assassination documents at the National
Archives
there is no electronic facility for
accessing the documents in fact there is
no not all the records that
that collection have research
identification forms which are posted on
the naira website but those are highly
unreliable and what we have learned in
recent weeks is that after telling the
public for the past several years over a
great skepticism by myself and others
that that they had the CIA had only
withheld eleven hundred or eleven
hundred and seventy six documents from
being released by the deadline of the
JFK act in 2017 that in fact we now know
they've now admitted that there are
thousands upon thousands of documents
that are not accounted for that error
are still being withheld
so the system is unreliable it can't be
trusted and in this case when we the the
CIA initially told us that there were 78
JFK documents and they were to go look
for them at Nara but when we got the
request when they didn't first did the
search after we got instructions that
they were to search they came back with
88 documents so these is this part as it
is this going to the point that they
benefit from getting documents even with
respect to the documents that are
already in the public domain
yes Nara yes not just the saving on copy
costs it's that I mean if you were to go
over there and do the search yourself
you still wouldn't come up with the same
documents that the government has in its
possession yes yet and you would be
you'd be reliant upon someone to guide
you and try to find the appropriate
place to go and is very complicated
there are five mill
and pages of records there and there are
all kinds of problems but with that
collection that hopefully at some point
we'll be able to get a congressional
hearing on but at the moment you have to
go through this process of you either
make a FOIA request in which the agency
that and it's not necessarily the CIA
could be the State Department the FBI
the agency has to be responsible for
conducting the search there you've got
some handle on the search without having
to do it yourself right okay yeah thank
that's all I have to say unless you have
any further questions thank you thank
you your honor
good morning Your Honor what may please
the court the public benefit factor
favors awarding out of a petition of
attorneys fees when the production of
the responsive documents from the FOIA
requests has been found to have added to
the fund of information that the public
can use to make the vital bootable
choices so that that formulation focuses
on what's in fact produced and if I can
just start with where judge Williams
started which is this let's assume that
what Davi stands for is the proposition
that you locate Santi that what was
requested if and I know you may have a
disagreement with that but just indulge
me if if you approach it from that
perspective what's the argument that the
public interest the public benefit
criterion is not squarely implicated
here yes well it's assuming that the
request is the foal and we use that as
the starting point the request itself
paraphrasing asked for all the documents
concerning mr. joy nice and there's a
very broad request and a broad sweeping
request here that request could also be
looked at in terms of where are the
connective tissues between mr. joy
needies and the assassination request as
the request also referenced and the
request that this the purpose of the
request for the documents from Johnny
D's was to add further light on the
assassination not just a a expose on mr.
Johnny D's life and his in his times but
to bring light on the JFK assassination
plot even under that light the evidence
that mr. joy needies had anything to do
with a plot to kill the president is
scant at best the evidence is presented
in this case talks about how
mr. joy knees shared a city with mr.
Oswald as at a certain point in time
that no one knows and no one can
demonstrate and that is one of the Nexus
that's used to prove that there is a
connection between mr. joy Metis and mr.
Oswald it also talks about a career
award where the thirty year career of a
CIA employee was used to make a very
weak connection between a two year
period in that career and that the CIA
therefore if assuming that there was
some sort of illegal activity in that
two-year a two year period but the CIA
endorsed that illegal activity to have a
Plaza
so now we're talking about what in fact
was produced understand but even if we
are as to that as to the award my
understanding from the record is that
somebody thought that was interesting
because didn't weren't there a bunch of
media sources that in fact republish the
photograph of the award recipient with
the award or as right my understanding
is that the district court was never
presented the photograph itself but
there was evidence that there was a
photographer at their awards ceremony
and there may very well be a photograph
Oh
oh is that not in the record I thought I
was represented it is it is the least
represented in the briefing that the
photograph was reproduced in multiple
media sources does that that's not an
art I'm unaware of that I was just
referencing a footnote in the in the
memorandum an opinion of the district
court where it indicated that it did not
receive the photograph itself but took
it for granted because of photographer
there and even assuming that there was a
photograph but do you know you know the
record of the case is are the
photographs the reproductions the
photograph and media sources are what
namely cited or they are their
assignment and there was a there was a
photograph that I believe that the the
appellant is referencing I'm just simply
I'm learning court that the district
court never had that photograph in his
hands it's according to the footnote
that it provided in its memorandum
opinion well I know I know
note says but I guess the question is
whether the footnotes right based on
what what I did this record
I'm just presented with French standard
said you're not taking the position that
the district court did not in fact did
not have the photographs either before
it or available to it you're just saying
that the district court indicated in his
opinion that it was unaware of that it's
exactly what you wanted it's just that's
what the disc or represented yeah um but
even assuming the existence of the
photograph I think that the analysis is
correct and I don't want to provide any
short shrift to the courts hypothetical
of ex ante consideration of what is
what's before the the actual production
and the request itself as the court
indicated we we do we do disagree with
that formulation but the the downside of
having a a regime where the request
itself is the fulcrum opens does open
the door to a broad to a broad request
such as the one we have here before us
pending upon how serious the connection
must be between the documents requested
and some at least plausible or not
completely implausible theory of
actually an involvement with the Kennedy
assassination right right so the the the
dichotomy between plausible and
implausible those are considerations of
course I think the district court used a
different standard as to whether or not
it was likely to add to the public fund
not whether it was truthful or not
truthful in terms of its actual content
or his result the district court I think
specifically demurred when it when when
when it grows the subject of whether the
information itself was truthful or not
truthful but instead tried to focus on
whether or not the information
assuming the truthfulness of it whether
the information itself and getting back
to the ex post production whether that
those documents those four documents
added something to the public discourse
that could have helped inform the public
at large about the political choices it
needs to make and the court is
absolutely right that the topic area of
this needs to be separated from the
actual production of what we have before
us after a decade of litigation on this
particular case after the decade of the
firm from the very beginning of the FOIA
request from now and over 1200 documents
being produced
we reduced down to four documents and
those four documents pertaining to the
topic areas I outlined before which is
the career ward and in travel forms and
none of those documents have the
connective tissue that you find in Devi
in Devi there are there's there's no
dispute at least the court found that
there was no dispute that the connective
tissue was there and that there was a a
there was a focus of the produced
documents that bared on the actual truth
or the falsity of the of the event in
question and that was the fulcrum that
that court used in order to make the
decision as to whether or not there was
a covered benefit we have a dispute one
of the points that was made in Devi and
echoed I think in our prior decision in
this case that affected the reman was
that with teaser language of connective
tissue you may not know at one
particular point in time what the
connective tissue is it might spawn
subsequent increases that in turn
spawned subsequent increases that and
then draw the connections and that is at
least a possibility in a situation like
this when we're already talking about
you know I don't want to use a
pejorative term but can we're talking
about conspiracies to some extent by
Nature and so part of the enterprise
here is want to look to see whether
there happened to be travel documents
that put people in the same place in the
same rough window of time and if there
are
maybe that leads somebody to look into
it scrutinize it a little bit more and
then they're not going to look at the
government maybe they go interview some
people that were on site and and that
spawned some things and so it part of
the reason that I think a lot of Av
suggest looking ex-ante is married with
this proposition that you don't know the
connective tissue based on a particular
frame of reference in point in time you
have to just understand that they could
lead to subsequent increase that could
bear fruit and I want to address that
point in two ways first I want to get to
what I believe the case law and the
circuit talks about in terms of the
purpose of the actual B petition in FOIA
and the fact that the initial purpose of
the FOIA of fee-shifting provision was
to not incentivize the requesters to
come forward with you know legitimate
request or otherwise but to incentivize
the agencies not to hide behind
bureaucracy and essentially wait out
those requesters who could not afford
the lengthy litigation and so when
looked at it from that point of view
it's not focused on the request at all
in terms of the the reason or the
trigger for the attorney's fees
provision to kick in but furthermore in
in a case like this you absolutely right
under you will never know when you're
requesting what the documents will
produce but if you ask a broad enough
question and if the chances are great
that you will find something that's been
withheld that will be produced and at
that point you are considered a
substantially prevailing party and you
are in this situation again and I think
maybe more so than one may one way then
the maybe the people wants to admit that
this is a repeatable situation where
after a decade of
you have four documents that have week
too tenuous connections to the actual
event at hand and the fees are on the
table for the taxpayer to pay at that
point but but it only took a decade and
there were only four documents because
it's not entirely the requesters right
no I mean if we're only here because we
went to litigation in the first place
yes if everything had been done in the
way that it turned out at the back end
then we never would have done the
litigation well you know that brings up
to the point of the agencies conduct
correct because the in this case the
agency had a reasonable basis to
withhold certain documents or to not
serve certain indices because of you
know case law all that was at the time
relevant and controlling in this circuit
the the agency resisted that search and
with the guise of this court and the
changing of that precedent the agency
complied
no it was things like that in the
initial the initial shifting of the of
the request to turn out you know the
district court found that that was also
reasonable - given the fact that this
was not a expose on Johnny D's but in
fact an effort to bring light to the JFK
assassination that there is a repository
that is actually meant to help the
citizens to to find information in that
sense so it wasn't as if we the the
agency you know gave a completely
irrelevant source to go to so those
things that that did elongate this
process but they would it was all along
along the lines of a reasonable conduct
that is also one of the factors in
dealing with you know the the people and
it goes to the other point that you know
even setting aside the public benefit
factor there are there are three other
factors that you know the district court
found in the favor of the defendant as
well and of those factors you know only
one can already be dispositive in the in
these kind of cases and that's the
reasonable sum of the ages
and I don't believe that there was any
serious argument that this agency acted
in an irrational way or it's some sort
of nefarious way to to frustrate the the
purposes or the attempts of the of the
plaintiff without cause so understanding
that context of the purpose of the
peoples of the fee-shifting provision
and the weakness of the connection in
this particular case and the fact that
in general these kinds of enquiries need
to be very specific case specific and
review the documentation having a having
a case law their work that says that
well D emphasizes the results and just
talks about the intent of the request
doesn't adequately protect against the
abuse of that possibly happening down
the road with broad requests and
confusing and inconsistent results as a
result of the fact that the requests
themselves are not tenable for the
agency to search such a broad request I
don't think anyone's jesting that the
intent of the requester is controlling
and perhaps not even relevant the
question is the objective link of the
request to something that might be
public interest
yes and and in this case you know the
the linkage to the JFK assassination
obviously makes a connection to a very
important topic area and if that's the
topic area then there there are certain
things that are sold and minimis as to
the actual results of that search that
should cause for the public benefit
factor to be called into question
and in this case there
no question that you know while
reasonable Minds can differ as to the
import of the conclusion of what these
documents pretend that is exactly what
the district court is called upon to do
which is in theirs own discretion to to
determine what is actually connected to
the over-arching subject matter in this
case the JFK assassination and the
district court determine that travel
records and a career medal for lifelong
career in the CIA are too tenuous and to
scan to justify a public benefit
analysis in the favor of the appellant
how does the and if we're talking about
degrees of remove or degrees of
remoteness that in our initial opinion
in this case or at least in the 2007
opinion in this case part of it came up
because of the way the statutes work
together was how remote the connection
was between the requests made by Morley
and the function of the church committee
and I think that the decision that we
handed down said that well it was only a
remote relationship that would be one
thing but it's not merely a remote
relationship it's actually a pretty
direct relationship to what the church
committee was investigating and if
that's that's something of public
interest because that committee dealt
generally with the subject of
assassinations so is there something to
the fact that our prior opinion in this
case documented a direct connection
rather than a remote connection at least
visa via the church to me right so to
the extent that the church committee is
involved then we're talking about the
investigation of the assassination yeah
and the subject matter of this
litigation is join DS and the
involvement of mr. joiner he's in that
process has already been exposed prior
to this litigation ever even even
commencing and the CIA has already
acknowledged the joint need he's served
on
or was a liaison with the House Select
Committee in that in that capacity so we
get to the fact of whether this is new
information now again whether join use
connection with the investigation is
really new information even though as
the court says it is a direct connection
is this new information adding to the
actual fund of the public information
Fisk and that's what we say we've argued
that know that it's this is since it's
not new information as Davie indicated
it needs it should be it should be new
information that it was while direct be
connected it wasn't new to add to the
funder of public information
it didn't turn out to be now right here
you're absolutely right it didn't turn
out to be new right if the if the lens
is what did the requester know at the
time had asked versus what actually
turned out to be your ought to write it
turned out not to be new but the but
because the information was already in
the public record the requester had a
chance to determine that this was this
was at least on his face that this
information was already out there the
subject matter of mr. Joe annuities and
his involved investigation was already
out in the public domain so if there are
no my time is the time elapsed if there
are no further questions we ask the
court to affirm the district court's
decision thank you will will give you
two minutes for about thank you very
much your honor I just want to say that
it's it's somewhat mind-boggling for me
to hear that there is no connection
significant connection between the newly
released information and the Kennedy
assassination we have the fact that
during the proceedings of the
assassination records Review Board the
CIA could not locate the case officer
who was in charge of the d-r-e the House
Select Committee had tried to find him
the Jefferson Morley was eventually able
to get the assassination records Review
Board to produce some dot some documents
and eventually Johnny D's was identified
however it was not known that Joanne
Dedes was working in an undercover
capacity at the same time that he was
working with the congressional committee
investigating the assassination that the
congressional committee was inquiring as
to who the case officer was and he did
not inform them and the CIA did not
inform them and that he had a direct
control and edie's have a direct
conflict of interest here because he was
the person responsible for pain funds
that too did to the d-r-e
with which Oswald was involved we have
the fact that the there was an award of
a of a medal to Johnny D's which covers
the period of time that he was the
liaison with the House Select Committee
not informing them when it was his
obligation to inform them of that is a
very direct very substantial connection
that is new information and then under
any definition of what potentially
contributes to the political - to the
public benefit it meets that standard
the same with the travel records the the
CIA disputes on the basis of what
evidence we don't know because there's
been no affidavit in the record but in
the
declaring that the traffic record forms
say what the see what that what the
government now represents to the court
they say the the records themselves say
travel records and regardless of whether
or not they establish precisely what the
CIA claims they did or what Morley
thinks they did they establish that
Joanne ADEs was in New Orleans on home
leave and that is critically important
because the d-r-e activities and the
Oswalt activities leading up to the
assassination of President Kennedy were
carried out in part in New Orleans and
in part in Miami so there's just simply
no question but that that this was all
is all related now one final point on
the issue of the photograph the judge
said he didn't have a copy of the actual
photograph what he had was a a citation
to the website for the New York Times
the print edition of the New York Times
did not carry the photograph the digital
version of it did and the the link to
the digital version was put in the
record for the district court so it is
it is straining credulity to claim that
that was not part of what was before the
court thank you case is submitted